Prompt API: Add overview for Prompt API (#43848)
mdn/content: files/en-us/web/api/languagemodel/append/index.md

---
title: "LanguageModel: append() method"
short-title: append()
slug: Web/API/LanguageModel/append
page-type: web-api-instance-method
spec-urls: https://webmachinelearning.github.io/prompt-api/
---

{{APIRef("Prompt API")}}{{SecureContext_Header}}

The **`append()`** method of the {{domxref("LanguageModel")}} interface adds content to the session's context window without generating a model response. It returns a {{jsxref("Promise")}} that resolves when the content has been successfully loaded into context.

## Syntax

```js-nolint
append(input)
append(input, options)
```

### Parameters

- `input`
  - : The content to append to the context window. This is either:

>     - A string — Shorthand for a single user message: `[{ role: "user", content: [{ type: "text", value: input }] }]`.

Reviewer: I think this is what you mean

```suggestion
    - A string — Shorthand for a single message sent for the ["user" role](#user).
      This is eqivalent to the passed text being inserted in `<input>` field in the message `[{ role: "user", content: [{ type: "text", value: <input> }] }]`.
```

>     - A sequence representing a single message in a conversation with a language model. Options include:

Reviewer: sequence is a spec term. Do you mean an Array or any iterable or what?

Reviewer: So I read this as "an array of the items listed below, which can only be roles. So this would look like ["system","user", ....]. I bet it doesn't so please look at this again.

      - `role` — A string indicating who sent the message. Must be one of:

>         - `"system"` — A system-level instruction that guides the model's overall behavior. Note that {{domxref("LanguageModel.prompt()", "prompt()")}}, {{domxref("LanguageModel.promptStreaming()", "promptStreaming()")}}, {{domxref("LanguageModel.append()", "append()")}} throw a `"NotSupportedError"` `DOMException` if a message with `role: "system"` is passed to them; system messages are only allowed in `initialPrompts`.

Reviewer: If this will throw if used in the message, then it shouldn't even be here right?

        - `"user"` — A message from the user.

>         - `"assistant"` — A message from the model (used for few-shot examples or continued dialogue).

Reviewer: Make these definition list so we can link to them.

- `options` {{optional_inline}}
  - : Represents the options that can be passed. Options include:
    - `signal` — An {{domxref("AbortSignal")}} to cancel the operation.

### Return value

> A {{jsxref("Promise")}} that resolves with `undefined` when the content has been prefilled into the context window.

Reviewer: Perhaps

```suggestion
A {{jsxref("Promise")}} that resolves with `undefined` when the content has been prefilled into the context window, or rejects with one of the exception values on failure.
```

### Exceptions

- `NotSupportedError` {{domxref("DOMException")}}

>   - : Thrown if `input` contains a message with `role: "system"`.

Reviewer: Is it just system, or will it throw if an unsupported role is passed?

- `QuotaExceededError` {{domxref("DOMException")}}
  - : Thrown if appending `input` would cause the session's context usage to exceed {{domxref("LanguageModel.contextWindow")}}.
- `OperationError` {{domxref("DOMException")}}
  - : Thrown if prefilling fails for any other reason.
- `AbortError` {{domxref("DOMException")}}

>   - : Thrown if the operation was cancelled via the `signal` option.

Reviewer: Usually lists are alphabetic. In this case I ensure OperationError is last.

## Description

> The `append()` method preloads a context before asking the model a question. A context may be a document, conversation, history or background information. Because it does not trigger generation, it is more efficient than calling `prompt()` with a prompt that is intended only to set context. The `append()` method can be called at any point during the session's lifetime.

Reviewer: The idea of a description is that you have a very short introduction and then more detailed information. If there is only one line of text which mostly repeats the top sentence then there is no point.

Delete section and integrate any new info up the top.

@jmedley Can you go through my comments in this topic and see if a similar logic would apply to the other items. If they are all the same as this one it fees like I'l be saying much he same things. I don't want to review what looks like LLM generated content if the flaws will all be the same.

Maybe we fix this one up, then you roll out same patterns to the others, then I look again.

Reviewer: PS That said, the info in the roles section above wasn't really clear to me  - i.e. when do you use use assistant and what is it for. You might reasonably expand the description alongside the param values, or say more in your description here. 

It is OK to put the info in the examples too, but the examples shouldn't introduce anything new - not covered in these sections. Only illustrate it in a practical sense.

Author: @hamishwillee I think maybe this is a follow-up task. I've opened a ticket for it. Please assign it to me. #43994

Reviewer: Sorry, but this isn't a follow up task. It's part of basic completion. The criteria being "this documentation is of no use without it".

## Examples

### Loading a document before querying

```js
const session = await LanguageModel.create();

// Pre-load the document text into context
await session.append(documentText);

// Now ask questions about the document
const summary = await session.prompt(
  "Summarize the key points of this document.",
);
console.log(summary);

> ```

Reviewer: As I see it you are trying to show the easiest way to append context for the user role before prompting. 

The title should say that and the words should explain it.

> ### Appending multiple turns

Reviewer: What's a turn?

Author: I replaced this with a 'few-shot' example and explained what it is.

```js
const session = await LanguageModel.create();

await session.append([
  { role: "user", content: "My project is a task management app." },
  { role: "assistant", content: "Understood. I'll keep that in mind." },

> ]);

Reviewer: As I see it you are saying that you can append different context for different roles. The title should say that. This needs words to explain the example too. What kind of code would this appear in? Why those content values for those roles?

const advice = await session.prompt("What database would you recommend?");
console.log(advice);
```

### Appending context with an abort signal

> 

Reviewer: Code is fine, but when/why do we do this?

```js
const controller = new AbortController();
setTimeout(() => controller.abort(), 3000);

try {
  await session.append(
    "Here is some background context for future questions.",
    {
      signal: controller.signal,
    },
  );
  console.log("Context appended successfully.");
} catch (err) {
  if (err.name === "AbortError") {
    console.log("Append was aborted.");
  }
}
```

### Checking context usage after appending

```js
const session = await LanguageModel.create();
await session.append(largeDocument);

console.log(
  `Context used: ${session.contextUsage} / ${session.contextWindow} tokens`,
);

> ```

Reviewer: Same. More explanatory text. Consider retitling too. I interpretted it to mean "was the context actually used - i.e. did it resolve - which seemed pointless because that is not what htis shows. 

You could do something like:

---

### Checking token consumption

The code below shows how you can log the percentage of tokens used after appending a large amount of context.

First create your 
```js
const session = await LanguageModel.create();
await session.append(largeDocument);

console.log(
  `Context used: ${session.contextUsage} / ${session.contextWindow} tokens`,
);
```

A context may be a document, conversation, history, or background information. You can call the `append()` method at any point during the session's lifetime.

## Syntax

```js-nolint
append(input)
append(input, options)
```

### Parameters

- `input`
  - : The content to append to the context window. This is either:
    - A string — Shorthand for a single textual message.
    - An array of objects, each representing a single message in a conversation with a language model.
      Objects may have the following properties:
      - `role`
        - : A string indicating the point of view the message is phrased from. Must be one of:
          - `"system"`
            - : A system-level instruction that guides the model's overall behavior. This must be the first instruction passed to the model.
          - `"user"`
            - : A message from the user, which the API should respond to.
          - `"assistant"`

>             - : Inputs that come from the point of view of the AI assistant, which mainly serve to provide context/history, and further shape how the model responds.

Reviewer: While this is much better than before because it clarifies the "inputs" it might be better as (everywhere):

```suggestion
            - : Inputs that provide context for the AI assistant, such as its persona or the format of its responses. These mainly serve to provide context/history, and further shape how the model responds.
```

I'd no longer block on the absence of a link to more information, but it would be better if we had that.

Reviewer 2: This is really nice wording. I've used this on all relevant pages, with a couple of minor tweaks.

      - `content`
        - : A string representing a textual prompt, or an array of objects. Each object includes the following properties:
          - `type`
            - : An enumerated value representing the type of content. This can be one of:
              - `audio`
                - : Audio content.
              - `image`
                - : Image content.
              - `text`
                - : Textual content.
              - `"tool-call"`
                - : A tool invocation issued by the model.
              - `"tool-response"`
                - : The result of a tool invocation.
          - `value`
            - : The content of the message. If the `type` is `text`, this is always a string. If the `type` is `audio` or `image`, the `value` can be one of several different object types; see [What data types are accepted?](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Prompt_API/Multimodal#what_data_types_are_accepted).

>       - `prefix` {{optional_inline}}

Reviewer: Do/should we have an example of this?

Reviewer 2: I played with this a bit, but was unable to get it to do anything useful, so I decided to just leave it for now.

If you do something like this:

```js
const response = await session.prompt(
  [
    {
      role: "user",
      content: textarea.value,
    },
    {
      role: "assistant",
      content: "!!!",
      prefix: true,
    },
  ],
  {
    signal: controller.signal,
  },
);
``` 

You don't get "!!!" added to the start of all the responses, which is what you'd expect, although the browser seems to recognise it.

The Chrome docs have a very brief example at https://developer.chrome.com/docs/ai/prompt-api?hl=en#constrain_responses_with_a_prefix, which doesn't give much away.

Reviewer: Yuck. OK, pragmatic solution. Sometimes for stuff like this I add a hidden comment for the next editor (in case its me, so I don't waste time retesting :-).

short-title: append()
slug: Web/API/LanguageModel/append
page-type: web-api-instance-method
spec-urls: https://webmachinelearning.github.io/prompt-api/
---

{{APIRef("Prompt API")}}{{SecureContext_Header}}

The **`append()`** method of the {{domxref("LanguageModel")}} interface adds content to the session's context window without generating a model response. It returns a {{jsxref("Promise")}} that resolves when the content has been successfully loaded into context. Use this method to preload a context before asking the model a question.

A context may be a document, conversation, history or background information. Because it does not trigger generation, it is more efficient than calling `prompt()` to set the context. You can call the `append()` method at any point during the session's lifetime.

## Syntax

```js-nolint
append(input)
append(input, options)
```

### Parameters

- `input`
  - : The content to append to the context window. This is either:
    - A string — Shorthand for a single message. Sending only a string is equivalent to sending the following with a `"user"` role in the next option: `[{ type: "text", value: "Some string" }]`.

>     - An array of ojbects each of which represents a single message in a conversation with a language model. Options include:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - An array of objects, each representing a single message in a conversation with a language model.
      Objects may have the following properties:
```

      - `role`
        - : A string indicating who sent the message. Must be one of:
        - `"user"`
          - : A message from the user.
        - `"assistant"`

>           - : A message from the model. Use this for few-shot examples or continued dialogue.

Reviewer: What is a few-shot. This should be explained or (ideally) linked. Really ditto for everything here.

Author: Fixed throughout the PR.

          - : One of `"text"`, `"image"`, `"audio"`, `"tool-call"`, or `"tool-response"`.
        - `value`
          - : The actual text of the content to append.
- `options` {{optional_inline}}
  - : Represents the options that can be passed. Options include:
    - `signal`
      - : An {{domxref("AbortSignal")}} to cancel the operation. Reasons to cancel an append operation include:
        - The user cancelled the request or navigated away.
        - A newer request superseded the old one.
        - A timeout.
        - A dependent resource was destroyed.

### Return value

A {{jsxref("Promise")}} that resolves with `undefined` when the content has been prefilled into the context window, or rejects with one of the exception values on failure.

### Exceptions

- `AbortError` {{domxref("DOMException")}}
  - : Thrown if the operation was cancelled via the `signal` option.
- `NotSupportedError` {{domxref("DOMException")}}
  - : Thrown in the following situations:
    - The `role` is `"assistant"` and `type` is anything other than `"text"`.
    - The input or output text is in a language the user agent doesn't support for prompting.
- `OperationError` {{domxref("DOMException")}}

>   - : Thrown if prefilling fails for any other reason.

Reviewer: FWIW (not an instruction), I'd be tempted to ignore alphabetic ordering and put this last. If not>

```suggestion
- `OperationError` {{domxref("DOMException")}}
  - : Thrown if prefilling fails for any other reason not listed in the other exception types.
```

Author: Applied similar to all.

- `QuotaExceededError` {{domxref("DOMException")}}
  - : Thrown if appending `input` would cause the session's context usage to exceed {{domxref("LanguageModel.contextWindow")}}.

## Examples

### Append context before prompting

> This example shows how to append to a context for the user role before calling `prompt()`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example shows how to append to a context for the user role before calling `prompt()`.
Note that we can just specify text input (`documentText`) in this case, because `user` is the default role.
```

```js
const session = await LanguageModel.create();

// Pre-load the document text into context
await session.append(documentText);

// Now ask questions about the document
const summary = await session.prompt(
  "Summarize the key points of this document.",
);
console.log(summary);
```

### Providing few-shot examples

> A few-shot example is a set of input-output pairs passed as an example to an AI before asking it to complete a similar task.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A few-shot example is a set of user role (input) and assistant role (output) pairs passed as an example to an AI, using the `initialPrompts` property, before asking it to complete a similar task.
```

Author: Fixed throughout.
